[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology well hello everyone welcome to
church history and theology as we delve
into yet another figure in church
history that uh we get to see develop
not only in the biblical texts but also
to understand some of the things from
history and how the effects of their
lives continue to affect ours today's
episode is James the Lord's brother now
I got to tell you I can't I can't quite
pinpoint another figure that I've had
more questions about in my years but
have never actually done the work to
settle out uh all of the desperate ideas
that I had floating around my head
regarding this man and
I had mixed up multiple jameses I think
that's common that actually happened in
church history several times with
regards to some of these guys it's hard
to keep it all straight what James am I
talking about here what James there is
this the Apostle James brother of John
or is this uh another James uh or is
James the just the same person as James
the Lord's brother James the Apostle or
it it really gets a little overwhelming
sometimes and so I really I don't want
to figure out all the jameses for you
here today but I do want to work through
James the Lord's brother which is a tall
enough task of its own because there's
so much you have to weed through in
order to actually get down to the
reality of who he was um believe it or
not there is all manner of uh
embellishments that were made about him
uh all manner of hagiographies and all
manner of
misrepresentations here we uh I
specifically always want to reconstruct
what we can know and then understand
where the limits are there's some things
we can't know and that's okay um if if
we can't know it there's a reason for
that and we will take what we can know
and devote ourselves to the truth of
God's revealed story and word and that's
something that I look forward to here
this evening so let's get started but
before we even arrive to the story of
James let me take one
side note if you will just a sidebar um
because obviously if I'm bringing up a
subject like James the Lord's brother
all manner of
complications arise in people's minds um
James just like Peter has a history of
embellishment that inflates his role to
an implausible level um also like Peter
by the way uh this was a thing to work
through um there are historically
challenged groups like The ebionites for
instance uh who considered James to be
the first Universal Bishop of the church
uh that comes from the 2 Century by the
way and uh that comes before anybody was
arguing that Paul or that Peter was um
so th this type of embellishments this
type of you know revisioning of History
uh to to apply oneself to uh one apostle
uh in favor of all the in favor instead
of all the others or any of these types
of things that kind of stuff shows up
even in the New Testament where you have
people who are you know I'm of Paul or
I'm of Apollos I'm of Peter this kind of
stuff and Paul rebukes that kind of an
idea but it shouldn't be surprising to
us that as we go through church history
there's many groups that glom on to a
single Apostle in direct violation of
the instructions of the Apostle Paul uh
to not do that with anyone including
himself including Peter by name uh or
Apollos or any other Church leader
because no single human outside of
Christ is worthy of that level of
devotion um with James though some
really interesting stories of extreme
asceticism um uh you know his ability to
walk unobstructed into the temple in
Jerusalem a lot of this arises due to
not only his role in the Jerusalem
Church which we'll get to but it really
has a lot to do with who his brother
was I mean when you are the brother of
Jesus people are going to make stories
about you when you are the same as if
you are uh one of the closest Disciples
of Jesus people are going to make up
stories about you or the mother of Jesus
or any of these others people will
always glom on to those who were uh
relatively close to uh a figure such as
Jesus himself and so D to who his
brother was I I want to ensure that the
statements that I'll make about who his
family members are who James's family
members are will come off to some as uh
dismissive of their beliefs um I want to
say on the front end I only aim to give
what is plainly said in the scriptures
uh and what we can know from history um
so here's the facts James is described
in familial settings as being the
brother of the
Lord in multiple genres of literature
not just uh in in references in the
gospels but even in his own reputation
in the book of Galatians the book of
Acts see the brother of the Lord is his
reference not only that we have it from
Josephus we have it from historians this
is not a uh you know a chummy pal or a
distant relation or a cousin or
something like this he is the brother of
the Lord uh that is the plain text both
of scripture and of History um it
doesn't matter how much linguistic
writhing people do about that um that is
how it's going to be taken here on on
this episode uh what it plainly means um
and I will say linguistically if you do
have to run to the sep
to prove something about a text using a
text like uh the reference about lot and
Abraham that really only demonstrates
desperation to make a text say something
that it doesn't the New Testament is
pretty clear on not just pretty clear is
abundantly clear on this James is the
Lord's brother hence the title of this
episode
obviously as Jesus had God as his father
and Mary as his mother there is only one
real way he could be his brother it's
not through God the Father it is through
his mother and I know this opens up a
can of worms of later beliefs that
people hold closely regarding Mary's
ongoing virginity which is a belief by
the way that arises towards the end of
the 2 Century uh ironically from a book
claiming falsely to be written by James
uh that's the Proto evangelium of James
we'll deal with that one later on but of
these things the New Testament knows
nothing the plain exegesis of the text
demonstrates that Joseph and Mary had
children after Jesus that they were
married in the normal sense that these
were younger siblings of Jesus as far as
we know at the writings of the OR at the
occurrence of Jesus's Ministry four
brothers and at least two
sisters a lot of the theories though
that go on about this about these about
James being an older brother of Jesus
from Joseph's previous marriage or
something like this these are theories
from many many years after the fact
nobody in the New Testament knew
anything of this nothing of that comes
from the New Testament or from the first
century or from the histories there um a
lot of it is dependent on the later
aesthetic uh musings that treat marriage
and relations inside marriage as
defiling of the
sanctification um of of those who are
otherwise holy uh of the raising of
virginity above the value of of normal
marital relations even though the
scriptures teach very plainly that the
marriage bed is not defiled in its
normal use uh those types of things um
are pretty plain and clear in scripture
but unfortunately uh aestheticism always
makes its ugly head and Rears it in
history and uh likes to mess things up
uh but drum is a story for another day
when we get to the late 4th Century so
I'll just let you know here on the on
the front end I'm not using
hagiographical sources to rebuild James
um someday we're going to have an
episode on hagiography and how to
utilize it because it says far more
about the writers than it does about the
stories it's writing uh and so that that
that's just my first introduction to
that if you want to use hagiography and
church history which if you're brand new
to this that is the uh it comes from uh
the idea of a writing about a Saint's
life it's basically a biography of a
saint so instead of a biography it's
hagiography um and it will be written at
a later
time about that person and it will be
embellished with all manner of things
everything from Miracles to martyrdoms
to um you just bizarre events and
occurrences things that we know have no
basis in history or reality but is a
genre of writing
that says again more about the writer
than it does about the object of the
writing and so you don't go to the Proto
evangelium of James for instance to
learn about James or Mary or the birth
of Jesus you go there to learn about
those who are living in the second
century who are writing these things and
what they believed and perhaps what
their influences were uh so we'll get
into hagiography once we once we break
into the second century I imagine uh
sometime this summer uh when we finally
get out of the first century um we will
probably have
to direct our attention towards
hagiography because we're going to start
running into it pretty quick and it
really does change everyone's
perspective of History because a lot of
people don't know how to deal with them
when you open up hagiography and you
read it and you go my goodness here's
all these stories that obviously are
meant to be taken as historical
realities well some of them were but the
the the the basic truth of hagiography
is that it is not reliable history um
and it has unfortunately influenced a
whole lot of retellings of history and
that's where uh The elusive quote
unquote Traditions come from um it being
the case let's get into what we do
know the early life of
James James was the eldest of Jesus's
Four
Brothers uh we have two lists of these
in Scripture that is Mark
6:3 and Matthew
13:55 these read in uh as follows Mark
63 says is this is not this the
carpenter the son of
Mary uh uh and brother of James and
joses and Judas and Simon and are not
his uh sisters here with us and they
took offense at him excuse me is this
not The Carpenter's
son in Matthew 13:55 is not this The
Carpenter's son is not his mother called
Mary are not his brothers James and
Joseph and Simon and Judas again we have
four brothers we do have at least
multiple sisters um here listed so we
have at least two of them we don't know
their names uh and there's frustration
there because people who had lived in
Nazareth knew Jesus personally and knew
James uh they always list James as first
that's how you list it out when they are
older and James here being the eldest
would have been the second born to Mary
uh first to Joseph it seems um and this
makes more sense because as you as you
address how all this goes down it means
that they grew up in
Nazareth we know that Jesus being from
Nazareth we can reconstruct as best as
we can that Jesus and James would have
had really similar childhoods not only
just living in the same house uh having
the same parents and being taught the
same trade from their father so there's
a lot of people that you know address
Joseph as you know a carpenter and you
know he's just only working with wood it
is a more broad term uh a skilled
laborer that works in construction or
anything it could involve ston work and
things like that to it's not like he's
building bird hous or something he in in
a small place like Nazareth uh would
have been you know someone who can fix
your roof someone who can fix your house
uh someone who can build this or build
that or build a door or a table or
whatever the case may be and Nazareth
was small uh Nazareth was a few hundred
people and so you get in mind that
people in Nazareth that are being
frustrated in both Mark 6 and Matthew 3
13 uh they are well aware of who Jesus
is and they go we know his brothers we
we know his mother we know isn't this
the isn't this the son of the
Carpenter and it would make even more
sense that they know the the names of
James Joseph and Simon and Judas why
well uh because they would have been
there with their father helping him do
his carpentry or repair or building or
whatever the case may have
been him growing up in Nazareth again
we're here talking about James he would
have been educated in the Torah
thoroughly uh he would have been trained
in the same trait as his father Joseph
uh again manual labor Builder home
construction repair all that kind of
stuff uh again likely why why everyone
in Nazareth was aware of the family even
by name especially the
boys we don't get anything about his
childhood very similar to Jesus while we
while we have one instance of Jesus's
child childhood when he's 12 years old
in the temple uh which is you know kind
of a remarkable thing we don't get
anything about James James is not uh
addressed to us as being there though
presumably he would be um and we don't
get anything really until Jesus's
Ministry kind of the same as with
Jesus's life that whole next you know 30
years or whatever the case may be is
just hidden to us we don't know exactly
what's going on by the way there are
other stories more hagiographies in
history Gnostic literature and things
like this that do arise and start to try
to fill in the blanks uh avoid those
because you don't have any again
reliable history in any way uh filling
in blanks like that in the 2 Century um
though they are certainly attempting to
uh there's a lot of skepticism that
comes from Jesus's family during his
ministry this is something that I don't
think a lot of people uh understand how
deep some of the skepticism went uh and
how much rejection there was from
Jesus's family including his own mother
um uh and that I know that that scares
some people don't let it be um we all
have our weaknesses Mark chapter 3
addresses
this Jesus had just become in Mark's
account a lot more prominent and it was
difficult for them to do anything
because there was crowds gathered
everywhere and Jesus has gone out again
get it in your perspective here James
and you know and younger brothers and
sisters and so forth did not believe
that Jesus was the Messiah all right so
get it in your mind their older brother
is about 29 or 30 and James and his
brothers and sisters probably would have
been mid to early
20s you
know
them that's a hard thing to swallow
honestly if Jesus is like 29 years old
and he's the Messiah of the world he's
God incarnate that's a hard pill to
swallow for one's older brother honestly
um you know he's always out doing
everything so perfect anyway of course
he's going to be that
right but uh one of the places where
James shows up in the story is alongside
uh the rest of his family now watch this
watch this narrative right it's in Mark
3 if you want to turn there starting in
verse
13 and Jesus went up on the the mountain
and called to him Those whom he desired
and they came to him and he appointed 12
which whom he also named Apostles so
that they might be with him
there wait a second let me let me
actually back up a little bit
here no I don't want to back up here I
do want you okay never mind we'll we'll
stay we'll start in 13 I was I was
probably going to go up to 16 let's just
get the whole setting here uh verse 13
in Mark 3 uh we're going to go up to
verse 35 just so you know and he went up
on the mountain and called to him Those
whom he desired and they came to him and
he appointed 12 whom he also named
Apostles so that they might be with him
and he might send them out to preach and
to have authority to cast out demons he
appointed the 12 here's the list Simon
to whom he gave the name gave the name
Peter James the son of zebede and John
the brother of James this is different
James by the way that's James the son of
Zebedee so keep that straight to whom he
gave the name boeris that is uh sons of
thunder Andrew and Philip Bartholomew
Matthew Thomas James the son of alfus
that's a different James too that's
that's the second James that's not the
James we're talking about here and
Thaddius and Simon the Zealot and Judas
the scariot who betrayed him then he
went home and the crowd gathered again
so that they could not even eat and when
his family heard it they went out to
seize him for they were saying he is out
of his
mind and the scribes who came down from
Jerusalem were saying he is possessed by
be elel and by the prince of the Demons
he casts out the demons and he called
them to him and said to them in Parables
how can Satan cast out Satan if a
kingdom is divided against itself that
Kingdom cannot stand and if a house is
divided against itself that house will
not be able to stand and if Satan has
risen up against himself and is divided
he cannot stand but is coming to an end
but no one can enter a strong man's
house and plunder his Goods unless he
first binds the strong man then indeed
he may plunder his
house truly I say to you all sins will
be forgiven the children of men but
whoever and whatever blasphemies they
utter but whoever blasphemes against the
Holy Spirit never has forgiveness but is
guilty of an eternal sin for they were
saying he has an unclean
spirit and then it continues after that
parentheses parenthesis and his mother
and his brothers came and standing
outside they sent to him and called him
and a crowd was sitting around him and
they said to him your mother and your
brothers are outside seeking you and he
answered them and said who are my
mothers who are my mother and my
brothers and looking about at those who
sat around him he said here are my
mother and my brothers for whoever does
the will of God he is my M brother and
sister and
mother obviously
here as we pull this out we see that
James's reaction is the same as is
definitively pointed out here the mother
and the brother of Jesus are all coming
to essentially as Mark accounts here uh
seize him because they were saying he is
out of his mind that the things that he
was teaching the things that he was
doing were outside their expectations
now we also know from John chapter 7
that James does not believe that Jesus
is the Messiah uh you see this in John
Chapter 7: 2 to7 watch this now the
jews' Feast of booths was at hand so his
brothers said to him leave here and go
to Judea that your disciples Also may
see the works that you are doing for no
one works in secret if he seeks to be
known openly if you do these things show
yourself to the world and John gives us
the description for not even his
brothers believed in him Jesus said to
them my time is not yet come but your
time is always here the world cannot
hate you but it hates me because I
testify about it that its works are
evil we get this picture of James
again it is hard to read these things
and not talk about Jesus because that's
what it's all about but here in the
story of Jesus and these happenings here
we get James one of the brothers of
Jesus traveling with his mother uh we
get him not believing in Christ we get
him saying alongside the rest of his
family uh presumably including his
mother who comes down with this that uh
he is out of his mind that what Jesus is
doing does not not meet their
expectations as a family does not meet
their expectations of what Messiah was
to do um what exactly has gone on that
brings them to this point we do not know
um but what things were happening was
his involvement with casting out demons
and things like this really seemed to
set his family off in a very unique
way this is the case for James
throughout Jesus's Ministry we do not
have any indication whatsoever of his
coming to Salvation uh in the last year
or two of Jesus's Ministry in fact we
don't have any mention of him uh not at
all regarding his presence at the upper
room or regarding his involvement uh
with with issues that had come up or
even being in attendance at things or
even at the cross which is a notable
absence there even though his mother was
there Jesus's brother and sis brothers
and sisters were not described as being
present that should sit in the mind
pretty
hefty in fact the very next instance
that we have is told to us after the
fact and that is found in 1 Corinthians
chapter 15 verse
7 where we
learn that Christ in all of his
appearances to 500 people here here and
uh to the apostles there and to uh those
who are at the tomb and all this there
we get this little parenthesis that Paul
includes that Jesus appeared to
James that obviously changed
everything seeing his older brother who
had just been put to death on the
cross res
resurrected I you know there's a there's
a few conversations I would like to be
witnessed to in scripture one is the
road to Emmas I think that is incredible
um but the discussion that Jesus had in
his resurrected form with James after
his
resurrection that brought James to
Salvation would certainly be on my top
five
I think it's one of those instances that
we tend to forget how transformative
that would have been for him and yet it
mention is only a couple of words long
in the scriptures uh for James that
would have been the Pinnacle of his
entire life uh his older brother has
come back from the grave demonstrating
with great power that he is indeed the
creator of Heaven and Earth
that's that's a weird day spent with
one's brother um and that appearance to
James changed everything about James
because all of a sudden uh it weeks
later when we opening up the book of
Acts we find him in the upper
room we find him alongside the rest of
the
Apostles um not only just him but all
his brothers
too it's in found in Acts 1: 13-
14 when they had entered they went into
the upper room where they were staying
and Peter and John and James wrong James
and Andrew Philip and Thomas Bartholomew
and Matthew James the son of alfus
different James and Simon the Zealot and
Judas the son of James different James
all these with one Accord were devoting
themselves to prayer together with the
women and Mary the mother of Jesus and
his
brothers
again James here is
found after Jesus has appeared appeared
to him because now we're talking about
after the Ascension this is the passage
where we're dealing with the with the
birth of the church and the the coming
of the spirit this is the day of
Pentecost and we have the presence of
James there in the upper room something
I will simply say I missed I don't know
how many times I have walked through the
book of uh book of Acts I missed that
James was present there probably because
there's three other jameses mentioned in
the same paragraph and it's just
stinking confusing as to which which
James is going on at which point there's
there's James there's James and then
there's Judas the son of James and then
there's James one of Jesus's brothers so
um that presence in the upper room is
awesome I I don't know why it's just
made me smile all week Having learned it
uh that that James was there after
having sat down one-on-one with the
resurrected Christ his older brother uh
and learn from him and become a convert
I mean James has been a Christian now
for a handful of days and here he is
sitting in the upper room present for
the day of
Pentecost it's
awesome there was another apostle that
wasn't there that wasn't even a
Christian yet but would soon be after
attempting to uh persecute Christians
and that is Paul
a few years after
Pentecost Paul describes a visit that he
has to Jerusalem in Galatians chapter 1
and it reveals something about
us or about James it's found in
Galatians chapter 1 and by the way this
was a lot of fun to piece together the
timeline here or something I'd never
done before in Galatians chapter 1 this
would be about 3 or four years after
Pentecost Paul recounts this trip he had
uh it's in Galatians 1: 15 to 19 says
but when he had when he who had set me
apart before I was born and who called
me by his grace was pleased to reveal
his son to me in order that I might
preach him among the Gentiles I did not
immediately consult with anyone nor did
I go up to Jerusalem to those who were
Apostles before me but I went away into
Arabia and returned again to Damascus
and then after 3 years I went up to
Jerusalem to to visit sephus and
remained with him for 15 days but I saw
none of the other Apostles except James
the Lord's
brother this again is a few years after
all of this and I I find it remarkable I
find it remarkable that actually some of
these some of these references even
parallel how Jesus appeared to James and
now Paul beginning his ministry comes
and sits down with James
James is taking on some kind of a role
in the in the um in the early Church of
Jerusalem that is prominent already here
he's been a Christian for just a handful
of years uh didn't even follow Christ
during his ministry and only after the
resurrection of Christ from what we can
piece together became a follower of
Christ and was there for Pentecost and
now is quite prominent in the church in
Jerusalem and actually as Paul comes he
doesn't even set his mind on staying and
visiting with anyone other than with
Peter and with
James in fact Paul says that he didn't
even see any of the other Apostles not
even
John honestly also not even the other
James as in the Peter James and John
thing that is not the
case and so Peter's first visit after
his three years away in Arabia and
Damascus uh 3 years that I think
everyone kinds of forgets because if you
read acts it's so quick um but James the
Lord's brother as he says is one that he
made up his mind to visit while he was
in Jerusalem important stuff starts to
reveal to us uh James's first roles is
uh as one of the leaders in the Church
of
Jerusalem when we start to carry along
into Church's history we move along from
the late 30s into the early 40s mid 40s
you have the martyrdom of the Apostle
James the son of Zebedee um one that
again a lot of people mix up a lot of
teachers in history have mixed up uh but
James the son of zebede uh was one of
the 12 in in Acts chapter 12 uh
was uh was put to death uh in the year
44 um right around that mid 40s
and it is about that time that James
really does that that the James were
talking about the Lord's brother Rises
more even to prominence in the church in
Jerusalem now whether this is that uh he
takes over uh a role that James the
Apostle had left behind in his martyrdom
is is really conjecture uh as far as I
know there is nothing that that says he
was replacing him simply because his
name was so similar um nothing like that
it's it's it's a prominence that even
Paul recognized years before it just
happens to be uh one of those things
that goes on it's just an important
thing to mention because acts 12 chap uh
verse two usually gets mixed up with
James the Lord's brother and then people
are super confused about who is the
James that's presiding over the Council
of Jerusalem in Acts 15 uh but suffice
it to say uh wrong James if you're
mixing that up with
X12 it is in the following years
after that in the late 40s that James
writes the first book of the New
Testament James writes the book of
James the general epistle the Book of
James written to again Jewish
Christians scattered amongst the
world this shows us something that we
will quickly now learn of James and that
is that his ministry was devoted to the
circumcision to the Jewish people that
were following Christ that was his role
and he played massive roles in ensuring
that the relationship between the Jewish
church and the Gentile churches would
not go to war with one another over
issues and James was enormously
important with regards to this uh and
the Epistle of James itself really
demonstrates this because it
introduces using the the the genre that
it is of wisdom literature it
introduces the gospel in a very Jewish
way using examples of those of Faith who
have come before them using the
descriptions of wisdom using the pursuit
of virtue and our proper relationship to
the law the the Book of James is by the
way just simply remarkable I actually
just got to teach on it last year uh as
a two-part series I did um on the Book
of Proverbs and then on the book of
James which again I argue is the
Proverbs of the New Testament uh but
James here having written it he is he is
writing in a very Jewish style it's a
very wisdom literature pical uh writing
on practical Faith wisdom uh true wisdom
from above versus Earthly wisdom in its
limits uh perseverance under trials all
that kind of stuff it is it is very
indicative of early mid 40s Jewish
Christianity and it's pretty cool uh
probably one of my favorite books in the
scriptures uh many have assumed by the
way a conflict of theology between James
and Paul um you know because James
writes this way and Paul writes that way
but those who do merely demonstrate that
they understand neither Paul nor James
very well at all both of them preach the
gospel of God's saving grace through
true faith that evidences itself in
works out after the fact uh that is just
plain how can you claim to have true
faith if Works don't flow both of them
will say this um you know there's dead
Faith as well that doesn't save anyone
and dead Faith results in
nothing take it to
heart in the year approximately
48 and so again assuming that Jesus was
born like
bc5 uh his younger brother James could
have been born about the year zero uh
maybe the year two I don't know uh 2 BC
or something like this so whatever Year
we're talking is that's about his age uh
so you can kind of work with it like
that so um in the year about 48 uh there
is an agreement between
James and Peter and John and
Paul and he ends up sending Christians
to Antioch I want you to see this whole
thing Paul's second visit
to Peter James and John in uh in
Jerusalem is really important it's found
in Galatians Chapter 2 now we can set
this on the timeline simply because Paul
is so good at telling us uh some of
these details that we don't get from the
book of Acts because acts again go from
one chapter to the next it can skip a
couple of years and you won't even know
that's kind of how Luke writes but uh
one of the things that's really helpful
is that we have the book of Galatians to
to help clear up some of the timeline
and in Galatians Chapter 2 we'll see
this in verses 1 to 10 uh again a super
important passage about James that for
some reason because when studying the
book of Galatians you're not really here
trying to you know figure out James's
life uh I kind of missed this uh
Galatians chap 2:
1-10 Paul says then after 14 years very
helpful I went up again to Jerusalem
with Barnabas taking Titus along with me
I went because of a revelation and set
before them though privately before
those who seemed influential the gospel
that I Proclaim among the Gentiles now
this is again side note this is Paul
saying you know um after all these years
I came back to Jerusalem and I
communicated them the gospel that I've
been preaching among the Gentiles
because again the gospel given to
Gentiles is going to sound different
than the gospel being preached to first
generation Jewish Believers it's going
to sound different it's in a different
culture it's with a different base of
understanding you can start with the god
of Israel you can start with the
entirety of the Old Testament scriptures
which are all in possession by the
church at this time you can start with
all of that I mean the the the the
familiarity with all these things the
expectation of Messiah all those things
is a different way of giving the gospel
to Jewish people than it is to go to the
Greeks and this is something that the
church has wrestle through and so here's
one of the ways they did it in Galatians
21:10 again it is uh 2 1-10 rather
um uh he's Paul says he says I wanted to
give them the gospel that I Proclaim
among the Gentiles in order to make sure
that I was not running or had not run in
vain but he says even Titus who was with
me was not forced to be circumcised
though he was a Greek yet because of
false Brothers secretly brought in who
slipped in to spy out our freedom that
we have in Christ so that they might
bring us into slavery to them we did not
yield in submission even for a moment so
that the truth of the Gospel might be
preserved for you and from those who
seem to be influential what they are
makes no difference to me God shows no
partiality here's where he talks about
James those I say who seemed influential
added nothing to me on the contrary when
they saw that I had been entrusted with
the gospel to the
uncircumcised just as Peter had been
entrusted with the gospel to the
circumcised for he who worked through
Peter for his Apostolic Ministry to the
circumcised worked also through me from
mine to the Gentiles and when James and
sephus Peter and John who seemed to be
pillar perceived the grace that was
given to me they gave the right hand of
Fellowship to Barnabas and me that we
should go to the Gentiles and that they
should go to the
circumcised only they asked us to
remember the poor the very thing that I
was eager to
do this
agreement
between Paul
and James and Peter and
John that Paul should continue to pursue
the Gentiles as far as he
can excuse
me and that they should continue on
their work in presenting the gospel and
the ministry of the Gospel to the
circumcised
really shows us the these dividing lines
that they had of responsibility again
we're not preaching a different gospel
we are not doing this but we are going
to very different backgrounds and that
encourages us to follow how the spirit
has divided up the apostolic Ministry
some of them were devoted specifically
to Jewish Ministries others were devoted
specifically to Gentile
Ministries at a date
slightly later or before the Jerusalem
Council we're going to cover here in a
second Peter's error is immediately
discussed in involving his reaction to
uh the arrival in um in Antioch of some
men from James it it's just the next few
verses and before we go to the Council
of um Jerusalem I want you to at least
see this so again right where we left
off verse 11 when sephus came to Antioch
Paul says I oppose him to his face
because he stood condemned for be before
certain men came from James he was
eating with the Gentiles but when they
came he drew back and separated himself
fearing the circumcision party and the
rest of the Jews acted hypocritically
along with him so that even Barnabas was
led astray by their hypocrisy but when I
saw that their conduct was not inep with
the truth of the Gospel I said to sephus
before them all if you though a Jew live
like a gentile not like a Jew how can
you force the Gentiles to live like
Jews okay what do we learn here what do
we learn about James what do we learn
about the issues that are going on the
Gentile Jewish Christian divide was
enormously difficult for Jewish
Christians to work through because all
of a sudden we have things like the
story of Cornelius where the spirit of
God is falling on them and saving them
before they are circumcised before they
are taking in any Jewish rights before
they're baptized even they before
everything like Cornelius the story of
Cornelius comes up really high in in
Peter's mind and reasoning about these
things but here some of the difficulties
is in the
practicalities how do we sit down and
eat with one another is is basically
what was going on is when when the when
the representatives from James who was
one of the leaders in the Jerusalem
Church had not been to Antioch yet Peter
had no problem sitting down and eating
dinner with Gentiles and just going wow
it's just normal day here we understand
you know how this works now and it's
different and all this kind of stuff but
then when those of the circumcision
party showed up when Jewish Christians
from James showed up Peter would not sit
down with the Gentiles and eat with them
but instead uh insisted that other
things should change around again uh
Antioch being ESS essentially the third
largest city in the Roman Empire at the
time uh this is a very Cosmopolitan very
Gentile City you're not going to have a
lot of Jewish Christians there and so
there's not going to be a
normal um let's just say a normal
familiarity with the Scruples of Jewish
Christians and so Peter kind of fearing
you know making anyone upset really
causes problems here because he insists
that in order for people to make others
happy you have to become just like them
not not just keeping in mind their
Scruples out of love this is a gospel
level problem on multiple fronts uh and
so the the exact details of it is not
given to us but uh that it was involving
men coming down as representatives from
James and in Jerusalem pretty
significant
stuff pretty significant stuff indeed
okay that gets us to the Jerusalem
Council this is in the year 49 most
likely maybe the year
50 the Jerusalem Council is one of these
councils where people tend to make it
mean this and that or prove this and
that uh or set up a uh legitimacy that
the church should be doing councils or
that we can do councils Beyond this or
whatever the case may be to you know
decide or to make Theology and so forth
I want to point out a couple of things
first of all before we even open this
passage and learn about James the
Council of Jerusalem was there to handle
some of the more practical disputes not
really to EST Lish
theology that stuff comes in the form of
scripture uh the Jerusalem Council was
there applying theology certainly uh but
it was applying to it to
actual Fellowship problems how is it
that Jewish and Gentile Believers are to
get along how are we to keep in mind
each other's needs how is it we can what
what in the world do Gentile Christians
have to do to become Christians do they
have to become
Jews do they have to follow the law do
they have to do all this kind of stuff
and that's really what's happening at
the Jerusalem Council well you say what
what does that have to do with James
James is essentially acting as the
presider I suppose uh there's a couple
of ways to say it but he really he's the
one that kind of summates up everything
and actually writes the letter of
response uh and establishes his judgment
and
um puts that forward so there's really
interesting thing here at the end that
uh uh I want you to see so uh as we go
through the Jerusalem Council here James
here presides over the Council of
Jerusalem for lack of a better term
presides uh he's he's advocates for a
compromise that includes the Gentiles
without requiring circumcision for
instance which was a massive issue uh
that is not by the way in any way
condemnatory on Paul uh in the next
passages by the way uh of recommending
to Timothy to get circumcised who's half
Jewish and half um half Gentile uh
that's that's a Ministry decision for
you know some of his ministry towards
the Jews uh there in in in Ephesus but
um as far as for acts 15 is concerned
here at the Jerusalem Council James is
also the one who proposes a letter to be
sent to Gentile Believers again and he
he emphasizes the exstension from a few
things and it's really interesting what
things he points out uh and why so let's
let's kind of get into this right
uh the Jerusalem Council now I have an
entire episode on the Jerusalem Council
so I don't really want to get uh into
that so much uh that is episode 11 in
season 2 if you want to go back and see
a detailed analysis of this but I really
want you to just see when when James
addresses all of this because Peter you
know he stands up he gives them this
whole uh spiel about um what he saw with
regards to Cornelius and uh they worked
through all of this that the Holy Spirit
you know he was given to the Gentiles in
the exact same way as he did to the Jews
making no distinction uh having cleansed
their hearts by faith and all this kind
of stuff
um and the whole the whole assembly
Falls silent right after Paul has said
what he had said regarding how the Lord
was working among the Gentile Christians
and then Peter comes up and goes yeah we
we saw that that whole story with
Cornelius that's that's exactly what
we've been seeing as well and everyone
in the entire assembly fell
silent and they listened to Barnabas and
Paul and as they related the signs and
wonders that God had done through them
among the
Gentiles after they finished speaking
James I'm going to insert the Lord's
brother just for clarity here James the
Lord's brother replied Brothers listen
to me
Simeon has related how God first visited
the Gentiles to take from them a people
for his name now stop there for just a
second that's an incredible thing for
James the Lord's
brother the one of the main pillars of
the church as Paul calls him in
Jerusalem whose Ministry is to the
circumcised believing Jewish people to
say this about the Gentiles this is why
I say his role in bridging this Gap is
not only just undeniable it is
absolutely
essential so again with that in mind
listen to this James stands up and
replies Brothers listen to me Simeon has
related how God first visited the
Gentiles to take from them a people for
his name and with this the words of the
prophets agree just as is as it is
written after this I will return and I
will rebuild the tent of David that has
fallen I will rebuild build its ruins
and I will restore it that the remnant
of mankind May seek the Lord and all the
Gentiles who are called by my name says
the Lord who makes these things known
from of
old therefore my judgment is that we
should not trouble those of the Gentiles
who turn to God but should write to them
to abstain from things polluted by Idols
from sexual immorality and from what has
been strangled and from
blood for from ancient Generations Moses
has had in every city those who Proclaim
him for he has read every Sabbath in the
synagogues this is one of those
fascinating instances in the church's
history where we have references to
something that is higher than uh looking
out for oneself or just advocating for
oneself
uh we have here James expressly saying
to them that all of this is to be done
in care and deference to those who uh
live amongst them as far as for James is
concerned he is keeping in mind that
those who are of the circumcision party
living in Gentile lands will have
certain
Scruples and he is addressing to them
that look Jewish Christians live in
every city Moses has been preached in
the Sabbath in their synagogues
everywhere and so after this in verse
22 it says it seemed good to the
apostles and the elders and the whole
church to choose men from among them and
send them to Antioch with Paul and
Barnabas they sent Judas called Barabas
and Silas Leading Men among the brothers
with the following letter again here's
the letter the brothers both the
apostles and the elders to the brothers
who are the Gentiles in Antioch and
Syria and cissa greetings now hang on I
want you to simply just see the fact
that this is not sent out by some
Universal Bishop of the church nor is it
sent out by one Bishop nor is it sent
out by one elder or one Apostle or
anything it's all of them the apostles
the
elders the
brothers to the
brothers who are of the Gentiles in
Antioch and Syria and cissa greetings
since we have heard that some persons
have gone out from us and troubled you
with words unsettling your minds
although we gave them no instructions it
has seemed good to us having come to one
Accord to choose men and to send them to
you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul
men who have risked their lives for the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ we have
sent them we have therefore sent Judas
and Silas who themselves will tell you
the same things by Word of Mouth for it
has seemed good to the Holy Spirit and
to us to lay on you no greater burden
than these requirements that you abstain
from what has been sacrificed to Idols
from blood from what has been strangled
and from sexual immorality if you keep
yourselves from these you will do well
farewell
now is that a testament to the entirety
of the Christian witness
no no that is not laying laying down a
whole compendium for how the Christian
life is to work and all this they are
talking about a very specific
narrow focus on Ministry and living as
Gentile Christians in the presence of
Jewish Christians how to keep their
Scruples in mind in love and deference
to one
another that same
advice is given to
them it is to be
applied and wouldn't you know it
it is strange I I don't know how this
all came together I happen to be
preaching on Jesus's letter to the
church in pergamum which is a little bit
further than cysia and Antioch away from
Jerusalem but
Jesus Jesus corrects them for not
following this advice and it's something
I never saw before in the connections
here I want you to see that it's
Revelation 2: 12-1 17
Jesus says to the angel of the church in
pergamum write the words of him who has
a sharp two-edged sword I know where you
dwell where Satan's Throne is yet you
hold fast my name and you did not deny
my faith even in the days of Antipas my
faithful witness who was killed among
you where Satan dwells but I have a few
things against you you have some there
who hold to the teaching of balum who
taught BAC to watch this put a stumbling
block before the sons of Israel so that
they might eat food sacrificed to idols
practice sexual
immorality so also you have some who
hold to the teachings of the nians so
forth
repent that correction comes in and
quotes half of the Jerusalem council's
letter of recommendations where Jesus is
saying to them these very things what it
wasn't just a Ministry decision of
Scruples they were
specifically not following the advice of
the Jerusalem
Council and and instead causing not
Christ to be a stumbling
block for those who are Jews that would
come to salvation but
themselves and their
freedom they say we could eat food
sacrifice to Idols whatever Idols are
nothing right that's not how Paul warns
Gentile Christians to interact in the
world that's not how Jesus here in re
Revelation 12 wants them to do it's just
this this plugging away at it's nothing
I don't have to worry about anybody I
don't have to give care of deference to
anybody I can do whatever I
want or the practice of sexual
immorality obviously it's not just a
normal thing here but it is it is with
regards to the idea that there there is
there is certain distinct holdups for
those who would come to Christ and
instead of of dressing accordingly or or
being of a certain mindset with regards
to these things keeping in concern those
who would have massive issues being from
other cultures why are you intentionally
putting yourself as a stumbling
block for those who would come to
Salvation in
Christ it's really interesting uh it's
really interesting that uh that Jesus to
the church in pergamum uses two of the
main
items uh from the Jerusalem council's
letter in uh in Revelation 2 I think
that's fascinating as a leader in the
church in
Jerusalem James continues to play a role
there um Paul is well aware of this role
obviously having just been in Jerusalem
as he leaves for his second missionary
journey uh he stays in Corinth for about
18 months and a while there he writes
the book of First Thessalonians and he
uses the church in
Jerusalem as a commendation for
uh the church that that the
Thessalonians are imitating uh it's
found in 1 Thessalonians chapter 2: 13
to 15 again James is one of the main
leaders there at this time and notice
the things that it's commended
for in 1 Thessalonians
23-15 where where where Paul this would
be like a year maybe two years after the
Jerusalem Council he's found his way all
the way to
Corinth Paul says to the church in
thessalonica we also thank God
constantly for this and when you
received the word of God oh that when
you received the word of God which you
heard from us you accepted it not as the
word of men but as what it really is the
word of God which is at work in you
Believers for you Brothers became
imitators of the churches of God and
Christ Jesus that are in Judea for you
suffered the same things from your own
countrymen as they did from the Jews who
killed both the Lord Jesus and the
prophets and drove us out and displeased
God and oppose all man
kind
this this recognizing receiving and
accepting the word of God from the
apostles that both those in thessalonica
as well as the churches in Judea do uh
is remarkable I love that reference
these are the earliest scriptures
written James and 1 Thessalonians and
all of a sudden you have the message
that's coming from the apostles mouths
the gospel of Christ uh as being
received as the word of God not as the
word of men
and more than that faithful endurance
and
suffering this is what the church in
Jerusalem is known for one of the main
leaders there being James it's just
fascinating James Spends His T days
spends his time working to bridge
tensions between Jewish and Gentile
Christians uh the 50s saw significant
famines in Jerusalem uh it's referenced
in Romans 1 and 2 Corinthians uh as Paul
takes up collections for the church
Church in Jerusalem again James is still
one of the prominent leaders there he
has a rough
time uh massive famines a lot of poverty
probably already being hinted at uh when
when Paul on his first visit uh uh
expresses that he was no on his second
visit that he was um looking to remember
or that he was being encouraged by James
and Peter and John to remember the poor
and he's like I something I was already
looking to do may very well have been
references to the church in Jerusalem
itself um which was a having
exceptionally difficult times in the
50s well we come to the end of James's
life it is in the year
62 he is executed by
stoning
um uh under the high priest at the time
uh during a gap in in Roman rule uh and
he was accused of breaking Jewish law
the story I'm not going to read it in
it's entirety just a short section of it
uh is found in Josephus Antiquities 20
uh chapter 9 paragraph one if you want
to look it up um at this
point uh fesus one of the leaders uh one
of the rulers there was dead and albinus
was on the road and so the high priest
took advantage of this let's just say
Hiatus of Roman
overlordship and assembled the Sanhedrin
of
Judges uh and brought before them the
brother of Jesus who was called Christ
whose name was James again for those who
have issues with this being a brother
and must be a cousin or something like
this you you have to explain why someone
like Josephus in the 9s is using this
exact same language that the rest of the
New Testament uses and calling him the
legal brother of Jesus I don't know what
you do with that um whose name was James
and some others and when um uh and when
he had formed an accusation against them
as Breakers of the law he delivered them
to be
stoned but uh but as for those who seem
to be the most Equitable of the city
citizens and such as were the most
uneasy at the breach of the laws they
dislike what was done they also sent to
the king who was a grippa at the time
Desiring him to send uh the high priest
that he should act so no more more for
um that which he had already uh done was
not to be justified nay some of them
went also out to meet albinus and he was
upon his journey from Alexandria and
informed him that it was not lawful for
him to assemble the Sanhedrin without
his
consent
um
yeah James was stoned to death under
false pretenses with wrong rulers in
place
um which is
unfortunate uh I know if you are a fan
or if you remember any of this from
about know I'd say about 20 or so years
ago there was a um archaeological
discovery that made the rounds on media
of um of an uary of James's bones that
were found um and people have argued
back and forth about that um you know
has inscriptions on it all this kind of
stuff I'm not convinced that that's uh a
reliable uh find so I'm not really going
to bring it in but I just want to know
there's um there's something like that
you can go look it up go read about it
uh I think some of the best writing I've
seen on it um it's definitely a first
century thing but the the inscription on
it certainly doesn't seem to it it would
be far too convenient for us to find
something like that I think but neither
here nor there um there is a whole
another account of his
death of James's death and this is an
account that uh I will simply call
Jesus's unreliable account um I say that
for this reason um hesus was a late 2
Century uh author who some of his works
are preserved by the quotations of uus
um who is a church historian in the
early 4th Century uh early 300s and he
adds all sorts of things about James's
life that are
unusual um things that he was very
unusually righteous that you know he
prayed on his knees so much that they
resembled camels knees and had a very
strict adherance to the law of Moses
which by the way is not consistent with
either Josephus which is exactly what he
was being tried for or uh to his own
test testimony in Acts 15 that's not
that I mean he yeah anyway um and that
instead of being stoned to death he was
thrown from the Pinnacle of the temple
uh that kind of that same place where
the where the devil took uh Jesus to
hesus like many early writers is not
reliable for actual history again not
only is it partially oral history um and
some of it most likely informed on some
levels um from the ebionites um over
emphasis on
James um such things are unreliable
notoriously so for speaking about uh
people that are held in high reverence
yeah you can think of it even in our own
Society in in America if you think of
the stories of George Washington for
instance uh you know cutting down the
cherry tree and having wooden teeth and
all this kind of stuff it just it it's
embellishments that happen over time it
happens with every historical figure and
regard whether people like it or not
Christians are historical figures and
this kind of stuff
happens um and haes spice's writings are
hagiographical with regards to James
here and can't be taken as authentic
history because again hagiography was
not having as its goal telling accurate
history we got to do a lot more work to
arrive at the truth than just taking you
know the the story of the church's
history handed down to us uh at face
value there's there's things in it that
are wrong there's things in it that are
great uh and we got to sift through the
reality of things in order to know which
is
which as far as that is concerned James
the Lord's brother I I got to say as far
as for research on episodes there's one
of the reasons that we we took uh one
week off for this was because La two
weeks ago it was Christmas but I also
wanted to spend more time with this once
I started delving into uh this story it
it really
just it made me happy I I don't know
another way to put it it made me happy
to read James's story um in a really
unusual way I'm I'm really impressed
with this man um I it helped that I had
just finished teaching on the Epistle of
James so I had a a completely different
perspective starting from um and it's
only blossomed and grown since then um
in the end we have we have James the
Lord's brother uh were presented with a
man who truly followed the way of his
brother our Lord and suffered martyrdom
for his faithful
reputation he takes to Heart some of the
most encouraging words he ever wrote and
these are found in the book of James
itself humble yourselves before the Lord
and He will exalt
you I'm going leave us with advice here
at the end of this episode may the Lord
bless you all
[Music]
[Applause]